# [tragical thinking](/2013/05/06/tragic-sample-sizes/ "tragical thinking")

May 6, 2013

Matt Yglesias on the Oregon Medicaid expansion ([link](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2013/05/06/conservatives_medicaid_and_the_poor_do_they_care_at_all.html)):

A lottery is great from the viewpoint of experiment design, but the sample size here was tragically small.

They interviewed over 6,000 people in the treatment group and over 5,000 in the control. What does Matt Yglesias consider a medium sample? A large sample? 90,000 people applied for the lottery, so we have a sample equal to about 1/8th of the population. I’m supposing he means it was tragically small because more people should have received Medicaid. But that’s assuming the gains that haven’t materialized.

I am readingThe Signal and the Noise right now. I think Nate Silver will probably be the best public intellectual of the millennial generation, because he is a talker and a do-er, a techie and a writer. Anyway, it’s true that the Oregon Medicaid study does not prove there are no gains from Medicaid expansion. But if your prior was a high probability of large health gains, then the two-year results–while not definitive–should cause you to revise your prior downward, to say, “There is a smaller chance than I expected that Medicaid expansion will make people a lot healthier.” Instead of revising their priors, we have seen supporters revise their bets, saying, “It resulted in large mental health gains!” Virtually no supporter of Medicaid expansion has ever said, ex ante, “We’ve got to expand Medicaid to reduce depression!” Why not? Because depression care is a tiny fraction of Medicaid spending, and if reducing depression were your goal then for the price of Medicaid expansion you could design a more targeted program to reduce depression…unless, of course, you think the depression gains were achieved solely because of the financial cushion that Medicaid provides, in which case you’re admitting that medical science played virtually no role in the program’s success. You’d be saying that, for the same level of government expenditure, an expansion of fire, flood, disability, unemployment and car insurance would have similar effects on depression.

Again, I’m floored no one has pointed out the drop in depression was achieved without any change in the rate of prescription medication. It is at least worth looking into how they achieved such large gains without medicine. Prescription antidepressants cost money and have side effects, such as loss of sexual appetite and suicidal thoughts, so if we can achieve large gains without increasing the prevalence of antidepressants, then, unless there is something magically optimal about the level of prescription in the status quo, the chances are we can improve mental health by decreasing the rate of prescription somewhat and substituting more of whatever it was that improved outcomes in Oregon. Please note I’m not some scientologist or someone suspicious of western medicine. Skepticism about the optimality of the current margin is exactly in line with the evidence here.
